Runtime overview & Astro components (#2790)
astronomer/docs: astro/astro-components.md

---
sidebar_label: 'Key concepts'
title: 'Astro concepts and components'
id: astro-components

> description: Learn about the components of Astro

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn about each of the components you can interact with in Astro.
```

---

> Astro is a SaaS application that provides fully managed Apache Airflow environments for teams of all sizes. You have the option to choose a standard or a dedicated cluster for your Deployments. In both the cases, you will come across some terms about the core components of Astro.
> 
> Use the following document to understand these core components of Astro and how they are related to each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro is a SaaS application that provides fully managed Airflow environments for teams of all sizes. To make Airflow more reliable and scalable, the Astro platform includes a few concepts and components that don't exist in open source Apache Airflow. 

Use this document to learn about key Astro concepts and how they work together on the platform.
```

> 

Reviewer: Before Deployment, I would like to see descriptions for:

- The Astro CLI
- The Cloud UI
- Astro Runtime

I know that we have another Astro Runtime overview, but it's also a key concept of Astro, so we should include it here.

Author: I disagree on this. Astro CLI is not an Astro component. Astro runtime I had added and I think you asked me to remove it :)  . Cloud UI - that is a fair point. I will add this.

Reviewer: I said the opposite re: Runtime! https://github.com/astronomer/docs/pull/2726#discussion_r1303048062

Reviewer: Can you use Astro without the Astro CLI? We sell the CLI as an essential component of the Astro experience, so even if it's not technically part of the data plane, it's worth mentioning here. Mainly, I want to communicate that the Astro CLI is how you test and deploy DAGs.

## Deployment

> An Astro _Deployment_ is an Airflow environment powered by [Astro Runtime](runtime-overview.md). It encompasses all core Airflow components, including the Airflow webserver, scheduler, and workers, along with additional tools for reliability and observability. It runs in a Kubernetes namespace in an Astro cluster and has a set of attached resources to run your Airflow tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Astro _Deployment_ is an Airflow environment powered by [Astro Runtime](runtime-overview.md). It encompasses all core Airflow components, including the Airflow webserver, scheduler, and workers, along with additional tools for reliability and observability. It runs in a Kubernetes namespace in an Astro cluster and has a set of attached resources to run Airflow tasks from a single project.

The main benefit of a Deployment is that you can fine-tune how many resources Airflow uses directly from the Cloud UI. For example, you can modify a Deployment to have a larger scheduler size if you see that your tasks are being scheduled slowly. Deployments also include settings for managing which users can deploy code and how they can do it. See [Deployment settings](configure-deployment-resources.md) for all possible Deployment configurations.
```

Reviewer: I tried to rewrite this to better explain _why_ these components exist. Otherwise, we are essentially just repeating the glossary in condensed form. If are making users learn about all these new ideas, we should tell them why they matter to the Astro experience.

Author: I don't like that paragraph! I get what you are trying to say. I will take another stab at it.

> An Astro _Deployment_ is an Airflow environment that is powered by [Astro Runtime](runtime-overview.md). It encompasses all core Airflow components, including the Airflow webserver, scheduler, and workers, along with additional tools for reliability and observability. It runs in a Kubernetes namespace in an Astro cluster and has a set of attached resources to run your Airflow tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An Astro _Deployment_ is an Airflow environment powered by [Astro Runtime](runtime-overview.md). It encompasses all core Airflow components, including the Airflow webserver, scheduler, and workers, along with additional tools for reliability and observability. It runs in a Kubernetes namespace in an Astro cluster and has a set of attached resources to run your Airflow tasks.
```

> By default, each Deployment on Astro runs:
> 
> - 1 small scheduler
> - Minimum 0 workers and can scale up to 10 workers
> - Each worker with a concurrency of maximum 5 tasks
> - Celery Executor
> - The latest [Astro Runtime version](runtime-release-notes.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: This is getting into too much detail. We haven't even defined concurrency or Astro Runtime - if a user is brand new to Astro, what does any of this mean to them?

Author: i don't think it is too much detail. All airflow users are familiar with Airflow and hence the terms scheduler worker etc. If Astro runtime an issue, I would rather change that line.

> 
> You can configure your [Deployment settings](configure-deployment-resources.md) and change these default settings in the Cloud UI or with the Astro CLI. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> After you create a Deployment, you can deploy DAGs to it using Astro CLI from your local machine or automatically push from your code repository using [a CI/CD workflow](set-up-ci-cd.md). Astro executes all DAGs within a Deployment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run DAGs in a Deployment, you first deploy them manually or programmatically using the Astro CLI. Then, you can open the Airflow UI from your Deployment and run your deployed DAGs. See [Deploy code](deploy-code.md) for more details. 
```
CI/CD seems too advanced to mention here, and it's essentially still using the Astro CLI right?

Author: Ci/CD is not an advanced topic.

> ### Cluster

Reviewer: I feel like this should go after Workspace, since conceptually it exists "higher" than Workspaces (as in, you can have multiple Deployments across Workspaces in a single cluster)

Reviewer: But also I could see us removing this? It doesn't feel like a key concept in the way that other items on this list are, mainly because it is sort of just a Kubernetes cluster.

Author: @lzdanski and I discussed and re-organized the components because an OSS Airflow user who is familiar with an Airflow environment and hence will immediately relate to a Deployment. And we add value by detailing other components. bottom-up approach. from the perspective of DE i think it makes more sense.

> After you create a Deployment, you can deploy DAGs to it using Astro CLI from your local machine or automatically push from your code repository using [a CI/CD workflow](set-up-ci-cd.md). All DAGs and tasks on Astro are executed within a Deployment. 

Reviewer 2: For core concept and verbally describing mental models, it's really important to avoid passive voice - which looks like [to be verb] + [other verb]. This type of sentence structure hides the relationship between actor and action. For example, `All DAGs and tasks are executed within a deployment.` Executed by what? I don't think Astro is technically correct but I was reaching for some way to turn the sentence to active voice.
```suggestion
After you create a Deployment, you can deploy DAGs to it using Astro CLI from your local machine or automatically push from your code repository using [a CI/CD workflow](set-up-ci-cd.md). Astro executes all DAGs within a Deployment. 
```

> An _Astro cluster_ is a Kubernetes cluster that hosts the infrastructure required to run your Airflow environment, which are also known as Deployments in Astro. You must select a cluster to create a Deployment. Clusters can be either standard (shared) or dedicated to your organization. They are created and managed by Astronomer. 

Reviewer 2: We switch between calling it Astronomer and Astro, is there a difference?
```suggestion
An _Astro cluster_ is a Kubernetes cluster that hosts the infrastructure required to run your Airflow environment, which are also known as Deployments in Astro. You must select a cluster to create a Deployment. Clusters can be either standard (shared) or dedicated to your organization. Astronomer creates and manages the clusters necessary to run your Airflow environment. 
```

Author: so basically Astro is a product by Astronomer . This is how we declared in [Glossary](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/astro-glossary) as well.

> An _Astro cluster_ is a Kubernetes cluster that hosts the infrastructure required to run your Airflow environment, which are also known as Deployments in Astro. You must select a cluster to create a Deployment. Clusters can be either standard (shared) or dedicated to your organization. Astronomer creates and manages the clusters necessary to run your Airflow environment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An _Astro cluster_ is a Kubernetes cluster that hosts the infrastructure required to run multiple Deployments across Workspaces. You can either create a cluster just for your team or use existing clusters that are fully managed by Astronomer. Either way, Astronomer hosts, manages, and upgrades the infrastructure for all clusters. 
```
I think it's okay to not redefine "Deployments" if we already define it earlier in the doc. If you want, you can hyperlink to the previous topic.

Author: hyperlinking should be fine.

Author: i don't like the woding because it is not in-line with the shared/standard and dedicated . I can try to change it in a similar way based on your change.

Reviewer: It's okay to abstract some details for a high level overview like this. I don't think a user needs to know exactly what "standard" or "dedicated" means right now, especially because "standard" is already a confusing term. Maybe we can hyperlink to the dedicated cluster doc to explain further?

You can create multiple dedicated clusters for your organization and manage them from the Astro cloud UI. For all available resources see [Hosted resource reference](resource-reference-hosted.md).

## Workspace

> A _Workspace_ is a collection of Deployments that can be accessed by a specific group of users. A Workspace is used to group Deployments that share a business use case or environment trait. Workspace is a logical concept and does not create any resources for your organization. However, you must have access to a Workspace where you want to create a Deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A _Workspace_ is a collection of Deployments that can be accessed by a specific group of users. You can use a Workspace to group Deployments that share a business use case or environment trait. Workspace is a logical concept and does not create any resources for your organization. However, you must have access to a Workspace where you want to create a Deployment.
```

> For Astro Hosted Dedicated and Astro Hybrid, workspaces can be granted access to specific clusters to host Deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is a pretty niche feature that doesn't seem necessary to know at this point.

Author: not sure I understand why ? It is an important feature that must be publicised.

Reviewer: I don't disagree with that, but is the point of this doc to publicize important features? To me, the point of this doc is to understand Astro components and why they exist, and I don't think this sentence relates to that goal. The point of Workspace is to group users and Deployments together. Cluster authorization is an extension of that purpose, but if we mention cluster authorization then we might as well mention API tokens, Teams, etc.

"Niche" was the wrong word here, but I still stand by removing the sentence to keep this doc focused.

## Organization

An Astro _Organization_ is the top most entity in Astro created for you when you sign up with Astro. It contains Workspaces, which are collections of Deployments, that are typically owned by a single team. Within an organization you can:

> - [Invite users, grant roles, and manage permissions](manage-organization-users.md)

Reviewer: This list of docs would be overwhelming to a new user. Am I really want to open all of these links if I'm just trying to learn how Astro works?  Half of these don't directly relate to Organizations. 

I think it's okay to not link to anything here and just explain what an Organization is. Some things aren't necessarily core features, but are still essential to understanding how Astro works.

Author: @lzdanski you want to chime in here ? I guess two diff views

- Compare DAG runs across environments
- Monitor usage and manage Billing
- Manage Workspaces and Deployments

> - Manage clusters (Hosted Dedicated or Hybrid only)

Reviewer 2: Should we add links or a link to some of the Mange Organizations pages?

## Users and teams

> When you sign up with Astro, a user is created for you along with your Organization. As the first user in your Astro Organization, you are assigned the role `Organization Owner` and have the ability to invite new users to your organization and manage other user's permissions. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you sign up with Astro, a user is created for you along with your Organization. As the first user in your Astro Organization, Astro assigns you the role `Organization Owner` and you have the ability to invite new users to your organization and manage other users' permissions. 
```

> When you sign up with Astro, a user is created for you along with your Organization. As the first user in your Astro Organization, Astro assigns you the role `Organization Owner` and you have the ability to invite new users to your organization and manage other users' permissions. 

Reviewer 2: I missed this formatting in my first pass! Should be bold instead of `code`.
```suggestion
When you sign up with Astro, a user is created for you along with your Organization. As the first user in your Astro Organization, Astro assigns you the role **Organization Owner** and you have the ability to invite new users to your organization and manage other users' permissions. 
```

> Each Astro user can also be added to a _Team_. A team in Astro is a group of users in an Organization that you can grant the same Organization and Workspace permissions. 

Reviewer 2: There's a fine line between adding too many hyperlinks and not enough. I'm on the fence about whether one should go on here.

Author: If its an overview may be not ?
